FRONTMATTER -- PREFACE
-------------------------------------------------------------------

    Beautiful is better than ugly.
    Explicit is better than implicit.
    Simple is better than complex.
    Complex is better than complicated.
    Flat is better than nested.
    Sparse is better than dense.
    Readability counts.
    Special cases aren't special enough to break the rules.
    Although practicality beats purity.
    Errors should never pass silently.
    Unless explicitly silenced.
    In the face of ambiguity, refuse the temptation to guess.
    There should be one--and preferably only one--obvious way to do it.
    Although that way may not be obvious at first unless you're Dutch.
    Now is better than never.
    Although never is often better than *right* now.
    If the implementation is hard to explain, it's a bad idea.
    If the implementation is easy to explain, it may be a good idea.
    Namespaces are one honking great idea--let's do more of those!
      --Tim Peters, "The Zen of Python"


SECTION 1 -- What is Text Processing?
-------------------------------------------------------------------

  At the broadest level text processing is simply taking textual
  information and -doing something- with it.  This doing might be
  restructuring or reformatting it, extracting smaller bits of
  information from it, algorithmically modifying the content of
  the information, or performing calculations that depend on the
  textual information.  The lines between "text" and the even
  more general term "data" are extremely fuzzy; at an
  approximation, "text" is just data that lives in forms that
  people can themselves read--at least in principle, and maybe
  with a bit of effort.  Most typically computer "text" is
  composed of sequences of bits that have a "natural"
  representation as letters, , and symbols; most often
  such text is delimited (if delimited at all) by symbols and
  formatting that can be easily pronounced as "next datum."

  The lines are fuzzy, but the data that seems least like
  text--and that, therefore, this particular book is least
  concerned with--is the data that makes up "multimedia"
  (pictures, sounds, video, animation, etc.) and data that makes
  up UI "events" (draw a window, move the mouse, open an
  application, etc.).  Like I said, the lines are fuzzy, and some
  representations of the most nontextual data are themselves
  pretty textual.  But in general, the subject of this book is
  all the stuff on the near side of that fuzzy line.

  Text processing is arguably what most programmers spend most of
  their time doing.  The information that lives in business
  software systems mostly comes down to collections of words
  about the application domain--maybe with a few special symbols
  mixed in.  Internet communications protocols consist mostly of
  a few special words used as headers, a little bit of
  constrained formatting, and message bodies consisting of
  additional wordish texts.  Configuration files, log files, CSV
  and fixed-length data files, error files, documentation, and
  source code itself are all just sequences of words with bits
  of constraint and formatting applied.

  Programmers and developers spend so much time with text
  processing that it is easy to forget that that is what we are
  doing.  The most common text processing application is probably
  your favorite text editor.  Beyond simple entry of new
  characters, text editors perform such text processing tasks as
  search/replace and copy/paste, which--given guided interaction
  with the user--accomplish sophisticated manipulation of
  textual sources.  Many text editors go farther than these
  simple capabilities and include their own complete programming
  systems (usually called "macro processing"); in those cases
  where editors include "Turing-complete" macro languages, text
  editors suffice, in principle, to accomplish anything that the
  examples in this book can.

  After text editors, a variety of text processing tools are
  widely used by developers.  Tools like "File Find" under
  Windows, or "grep" on Unix (and other platforms), perform the
  basic chore of -locating- text patterns.  "Little languages"
  like sed and awk perform basic text manipulation (or even
  nonbasic).  A large number of utilities--especially in
  Unix-like environments--perform small custom text processing
  tasks:  'wc', 'sort', 'tr', 'md5sum', 'uniq', 'split',
  'strings', and many others.

  At the top of the text processing food chain are general-purpose
  programming languages, such as Python. I wrote this book on
  Python in large part because Python is such a clear, expressive,
  and general-purpose language. But for all Python's virtues, text
  editors and "little" utilities will always have an important
  place for developers "getting the job done." As simple as Python
  is, it is still more complicated than you need to achieve many
  basic tasks. But once you get past the very simple, Python is a
  perfect language for making the difficult things possible (and it
  is also good at making the easy things simple).


SECTION 2 -- The Philosophy of Text Processing
-------------------------------------------------------------------

  Hang around any Python discussion groups for a little while,
  and you will certainly be dazzled by the contributions of the
  Python developer, Tim Peters (and by a number of other
  Pythonistas).  His "Zen of Python" captures much of the reason
  that I choose Python as the language in which to solve most
  programming tasks that are presented to me.  But to understand
  what is most special about -text processing- as a programming
  task, it is worth turning to Perl creator Larry Wall's cardinal
  virtues of programming:  laziness, impatience, hubris.

  What sets text processing most clearly apart from other tasks
  computer programmers accomplish is the frequency with which we
  perform text processing on an ad hoc or "one-shot" basis.  One
  rarely bothers to create a one-shot GUI interface for a
  program.  You even less frequently perform a one-shot
  normalization of a relational database.  But every programmer
  with a little experience has had numerous occasions where she
  has received a trickle of textual information (or maybe a
  deluge of it) from another department, from a client, from a
  developer working on a different project, or from data dumped
  out of a DBMS; the problem in such cases is always to "process"
  the text so that it is usable for your own project, program,
  database, or work unit.  Text processing to the rescue.  This
  is where the virtue of impatience first appears--we just want
  the stuff processed, right now!

  But text processing tasks that were obviously one-shot tasks
  that we knew we would never need again have a habit of coming
  back like restless ghosts.  It turns out that that client needs
  to update the one-time data they sent last month.  Or the boss
  decides that she would really like a feature of that text
  summarized in a slightly different way.  The virtue of laziness
  is our friend here--with our foresight not to actually delete
  those one-shot scripts, we have them available for easy reuse
  and/or modification when the need arises.

  Enough is not enough, however.  That script you reluctantly
  used a second time turns out to be quite similar to a more
  general task you will need to perform frequently, perhaps even
  automatically.  You imagine that with only a slight amount of
  extra work you can generalize and expand the script, maybe add
  a little error checking and some runtime options while you are
  at it; and do it all in time and under budget (or even as a
  side project, off the budget).  Obviously, this is the voice of
  that greatest of programmers' virtues: hubris.

  The goal of this book is to make its readers a little lazier, a
  smidgeon more impatient, and a whole bunch more hubristic.
  Python just happens to be the language best suited to the study
  of virtue.


SECTION 3 -- What You'll Need to Use This Book
-------------------------------------------------------------------

  This book is ideally suited for programmers who are a little
  bit familiar with Python, and whose daily tasks involve a fair
  amount of text processing chores.  Programmers who have some
  background in other programming languages--especially with
  other "scripting" languages--should be able to pick up enough
  Python to get going by reading Appendix A.

  While Python is a rather simple language at heart, this book is
  not intended as a tutorial on Python for nonprogrammers. Instead,
  this book is about two other things: getting the job done,
  pragmatically and efficiently; and understanding why what works
  works and what doesn't work doesn't work, theoretically and
  conceptually. As such, we hope this book can be useful both to
  working programmers and to students of programming at a level
  just past the introductory.

  Many sections of this book are accompanied by problems and
  exercises, and these in turn often pose questions for users.
  In most cases, the answers to the listed questions are somewhat
  open-ended--there are no simple right answers.  I believe that
  working through the provided questions will help both
  self-directed and instructor-guided learners; the questions can
  typically be answered at several levels and often have an
  underlying subtlety.  Instructors who wish to use this text are
  encouraged to contact the author for assistance in structuring
  a curriculum involving it.  All readers are encouraged to
  consult the book's Web site to see possible answers provided by
  both the author and other readers; additional related questions
  will be added to the Web site over time, along with other
  resources.

  The Python language itself is conservative.  Almost every
  Python script written ten years ago for Python 1.0 will run
  fine in Python 2.3+.  However, as versions improve, a certain
  number of new features have been added.  The most significant
  changes have matched the version number changes--Python 2.0
  introduced list comprehensions, augmented assignments, Unicode
  support, and a standard XML package.  Many scripts written in
  the most natural and efficient manner using Python 2.0+ will
  not run without changes in earlier versions of Python.

  The general target of this book will be users of Python 2.1+,
  but some 2.2+ specific features will be utilized in examples.
  Maybe half the examples in this book will run fine on Python
  1.5.1+ (and slightly fewer on older versions), but examples
  will not necessarily indicate their requirement for Python 2.0+
  (where it exists).  On the other hand, new features introduced
  with Python 2.1 and above will only be utilized where they make
  a task significantly easier, or where the feature itself is
  being illustrated.  In any case, examples requiring versions
  past Python 2.0 will usually indicate this explicitly.

  In the case of modules and packages--whether in the standard
  library or third-party--we will explicitly indicate what Python
  version is required and, where relevant, which version added
  the module or package to the standard library.  In some cases,
  it will be possible to use later standard library modules with
  earlier Python versions.  In important cases, this possibility
  will be noted.


SECTION 4 -- Conventions Used in This Book
-------------------------------------------------------------------

  Several typographic conventions are used in main text to guide
  the readers eye. Both block and inline literals are presented in
  a fixed font, including names of utilities, URLs, variable names,
  and code samples. Names of objects in the standard library,
  however, are presented in italics. Names of modules and packages
  are printed in a sans serif typeface.  Heading come in several
  different fonts, depending on their level and purpose.

  All constants, functions, and classes in discussions and
  cross-references will be explicitly prepended with their
  namespace (module).  Methods will additionally be prepended
  with their class.  In some cases, code examples will use the
  local namespace, but a preference for explicit namespace
  identification will be present in sample code also.  For
  example, a reference might read:

  -->

  SEE ALSO, `email.Generator.DecodedGenerator.flatten()`,
  `raw_input()`, `tempfile.mktemp()`

  <--

  The first is a class method in the [email.Generator] module;
  the second, a built-in function; the last, a function in the
  [tempfile] module.

  In the special case of built-in methods on types, the
  expression for an empty type object will be used in the style
  of a namespace modifier.  For example:

  -->+

  Methods of built-in types include `[].sort()`, `"".islower()`,
  `{}.keys()`, and `(lambda:1).func_code`.

  <--

  The file object type will be indicated by the name 'FILE' in
  capitals; A reference to a file object method will appear as,
  for example:

  -->

  SEE ALSO, `FILE.flush()`

  <--

  Brief inline illustrations of Python concepts and
  usage will be taken from the Python interactive shell.  This
  approach allows readers to see the immediate evaluation of
  constructs, much as they might explore Python themselves.
  Moreover, examples presented in this manner will be
  self-sufficient (not requiring external data), and may be
  entered--with variations--by readers trying to get a grasp on a
  concept.  For example:

  -->+

      #*----- Shell sample -----#
      >>> 13/7  # integer division
      1
      >>> 13/7. # float division
      1.8571428571428572

  <--

  In documentation of module functions, where named arguments are
  available, they are listed with their default value.  Optional
  arguments are listed in square brackets.  These conventions are
  also used in the _Python Library Reference_.  For example:

  -->

  foobar.spam(s, val=23 [,taste="spicy"])
      The function `foobar.spam()` uses the argument 's' to ...

  <--

  If~a~named argument does not have a specifiable default value,
  the argument is listed followed by an equal sign and ellipsis.
  For example:

  -->

  foobar.baz(string=..., maxlen=...)
      The `foobar.baz()` function ...

  <--

  With the introduction of Unicode support to Python, an
  equivalence between a character and a byte no longer holds in
  all cases.  Where an operation takes a numeric argument
  affecting a string-like object, the documentation will specify
  whether characters or bytes are being counted.  For example:

  -->+

  Operation A reads 'num' bytes from the buffer.  Operation B
  reads 'num' characters from the buffer.

  <--

  The first operation indicates a number of actual 8-bit bytes
  affected.  The second operation indicates an indefinite number of
  bytes are affected, but that they compose a number of (maybe
  multibyte) characters.


SECTION 5 -- A Word on Source Code Examples
-------------------------------------------------------------------

  First things first.  All the source code in this book is hereby
  released to the public domain.  You can use it however you
  like, without restriction.  You can include it in free
  software, or in commercial/proprietary projects.  Change it to
  your heart's content, and in any manner you want.  If you feel
  like giving credit to the author (or sending him large checks)
  for code you find useful, that is fine--but no obligation to do
  so exists.

  All the source code in this book, and various other public
  domain examples, can be found at the book's Web site.  If such
  an electronic form is more convenient for you, we hope this
  helps you.  In fact, if you are able, you might benefit from
  visiting this location, where you might find updated versions
  of examples or other useful utilities not mentioned in the
  book.

  First things out of the way, let us turn to second things.
  Little of the source code in this book is intended as a final
  say on how to perform a given task.  Many of the examples are
  easy enough to copy directly into your own program, or to use
  as stand-alone utilities.  But the real goal in presenting the
  examples is educational.  We really hope you will -think- about
  what the examples do, and why they do it the way they do.  In
  fact, we hope readers will think of better, faster, and more
  general ways of performing the same tasks.  If the examples
  work their best, they should be better as inspirations than as
  instructions.


SECTION 6 -- External Resources
-------------------------------------------------------------------

  TOPIC -- General Resources
  --------------------------------------------------------------------

  A good clearinghouse for resources and links related to this
  book is the book's Web site. Over time, I will add errata and
  additional examples, questions, answers, utilities, and so on to
  the site, so check it from time to time:

    <http://gnosis.cx/TPiP/>

  The first place you should probably turn for -any- question on
  Python programming (after this book), is:

    <http://www.python.org/>

  The Python newsgroup '<comp.lang.python>' is an amazingly useful
  resource, with discussion that is generally both friendly and
  erudite.  You may also post to and follow the newsgroup via a
  mirrored mailing list:

    <http://mail.python.org/mailman/listinfo/python-list>

  TOPIC -- Books
  --------------------------------------------------------------------

  This book generally aims at an intermediate reader.  Other
  Python books are better introductory texts (especially for
  those fairly new to programming generally).  Some good
  introductory texts are:

    _Core Python Programming_, Wesley J. Chun, Prentice Hall,
    2001.  ISBN:  0-130-26036-3.

    _Learning Python_, Mark Lutz & David Ascher, O'Reilly, 1999.
    ISBN:  1-56592-464-9.

    _The Quick Python Book_, Daryl Harms & Kenneth McDonald,
    Manning, 2000.  ISBN:  1-884777-74-0.

  As introductions, I would generally recommend these books in the
  order listed, but learning styles vary between readers.

  Two texts that overlap this book somewhat, but focus more
  narrowly on referencing the standard library are:

    _Python Essential Reference, Second Edition_, David M.
    Beazley, New Riders, 2001.  ISBN:  0-7357-1091-0.

    _Python Standard Library_, Fredrik Lundh, O'Reilly, 2001.
    ISBN:  0-596-00096-0.

  For coverage of XML, at a far more detailed level than this
  book has room for, is the excellent text:

    _Python & XML_, Christopher A. Jones & Fred L. Drake, Jr.,
    O'Reilly, 2002.  ISBN:  0-596-00128-2.


  TOPIC -- Software Directories
  --------------------------------------------------------------------

  Currently, the best Python-specific directory for software is
  the Vaults of Parnassus:

    <http://www.vex.net/parnassus/>

  SourceForge is a general open source software resource.  Many
  projects--Python and otherwise--are hosted at that site, and
  the site provides search capabilities, keywords, category
  browsing, and the like:

    <http://sourceforge.net/>

  Freshmeat is another widely used directory of software projects
  (mostly open source).  Like the Vaults of Parnassus, Freshmeat
  does not directly host project files, but simply acts as an
  information clearinghouse for finding relevant projects:

    <http://freshmeat.net/>


  TOPIC -- Specific Software
  --------------------------------------------------------------------

  A number of Python projects are discussed in this book.  Most
  of those are listed in one or more of the software directories
  mentioned above.  A general search engine like Google,
  <http://google.com>, is also useful in locating project
  home pages.  Below are a number of project URLs that are current
  at the time of this writing.  If any of these fall out of date
  by the time you read this book, try searching in a search
  engine or software directory for an updated URL.

  The author's -Gnosis Utilities- contains a number of Python
  packages mentioned in this book, including [gnosis.indexer],
  [gnosis.xml.indexer], [gnosis.xml.pickle], and others.  You can
  download the most current version from:

    <http://gnosis.cx/download/Gnosis_Utils-current.tar.gz>

  eGenix.com provides a number of useful Python extensions, some
  of which are documented in this book.  These include
  [mx.TextTools], [mx.DateTime], severeral new datatypes, and
  other facilities:

    <http://egenix.com/files/python/eGenix-mx-Extensions.html>

  [SimpleParse] is hosted by SourceForge, at:

    <http://simpleparse.sourceforge.net/>

  The [PLY] parsers has a home page at:

    <http://systems.cs.uchicago.edu/ply/ply.html>«



